{{Infobox person
| name               = Franklin Swimmer McLemore
| birth_name         = Franklin Swimmer McLemore
| birth_date         = {{birth date|1943|1|16}}
| birth_place        = [[Tahlequah, Oklahoma]]
| death_date         = {{death date and age|2005|2|5|1943|1|16}}
| death_place        = [[Killeen, Texas]]
| resting_place      = Double Head Cemetery, [[Stilwell, Oklahoma]]
| nationality        = American
| citizenship        = [[Cherokee Nation]]
| ethnicity          = [[Cherokee people|Cherokee]] (documented 15/16 blood quantum)
| occupation         = Community organizer, Indigenous rights advocate, Cherokee heritage educator
| years_active       = 1960s–2005
| known_for          = Founding member of [[Dallas Indian Chamber of Commerce]], [[Dallas Inter-Tribal Center]]
| spouse             =
| partner            = Linda Ellis
| children           = 5
| parents            = Daniel "Dan" McLemore<br/>Luvice Swimmer
| relatives          = [[Hair Conrad]] (ancestor)<br/>Andrew Swimmer (grandfather)<br/>Six siblings
}}

'''Franklin Swimmer McLemore''' (January 16, 1943 – February 5, 2005) was an American [[Cherokee people|Cherokee]] community organizer, indigenous rights advocate, and heritage educator. A descendant of [[Hair Conrad]], a documented leader during the [[Trail of Tears]], McLemore spent his life working to preserve and promote Cherokee culture through organizational leadership in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area. He served as a founding board member of the [[Dallas Indian Chamber of Commerce]] and the Dallas Inter-Tribal Center, and established the Tribal American Network, Inc. (TAN) to support indigenous education and cultural preservation.<ref name="obituary">{{cite news |title=Franklin Swimmer McLemore Obituary |newspaper=The Dallas Morning News |date=February 7, 2005}}</ref>

==Early life and Cherokee lineage==

Franklin Swimmer McLemore was born on January 16, 1943, in [[Tahlequah, Oklahoma]], the capital of the [[Cherokee Nation]]. His parents were Daniel "Dan" McLemore (c. 1912–1993) and Luvice Swimmer (1916–1988), who was documented as a full-blood Cherokee enrolled with the Cherokee Nation.<ref name="dawes_swimmer">{{cite web |title=Dawes Commission Enrollment Records |url=https://www.archives.gov/research/native-americans/dawes |publisher=National Archives and Records Administration}}</ref>

McLemore's maternal grandfather was Andrew Swimmer, a prominent figure in the Cherokee community whose family name appears extensively in the [[Dawes Rolls]] (1898–1914). The Swimmer family originated in the Saline and Cooweescoowee districts of the [[Cherokee Nation (19th century)|Cherokee Nation]] prior to [[Indian removal|removal]].<ref name="cherokee_archives">{{cite book |last=Starr |first=Emmet |title=History of the Cherokee Indians and Their Legends and Folk Lore |year=1921 |publisher=The Warden Company |location=Oklahoma City |pages=456–458}}</ref>

===Connection to Hair Conrad===

McLemore's lineage included [[Hair Conrad]] (also known as Tsan Usdi), a documented Cherokee leader who served in the [[Cherokee Constitutional Convention of 1827|1827 Constitutional Convention]] and led the first detachment of Cherokee emigrants on the [[Trail of Tears]] in 1838–1839.<ref name="conrad_trail">{{cite book |last=Perdue |first=Theda |last2=Green |first2=Michael D. |title=The Cherokee Nation and the Trail of Tears |year=2007 |publisher=Viking |isbn=978-0-670-03150-9 |pages=112–114}}</ref> This ancestral connection placed McLemore within one of the Cherokee Nation's most historically documented family lines, a heritage he would spend his lifetime honoring through education and advocacy.

McLemore's documented blood quantum was 15/16 Cherokee, reflecting minimal European admixture across multiple generations. This high degree of Cherokee ancestry was verified through [[Dawes Commission]] records and Cherokee Nation enrollment documentation.<ref name="blood_quantum">{{cite web |title=Cherokee Nation Enrollment Records |url=https://www.cherokee.org/services/tribal-registration/ |publisher=Cherokee Nation}}</ref>

==Military service==

McLemore served in the [[United States Army]], continuing a tradition of Cherokee military service that extended back to [[Cherokee in the American Civil War|Cherokee participation in the Civil War]] and both World Wars. Details of his service dates and assignments have not been extensively documented in public records, though his veteran status was recognized at his burial with military honors at Double Head Cemetery in Stilwell, Oklahoma.<ref name="military_burial">{{cite web |title=Veterans Burial Benefits |url=https://www.va.gov/burials-memorials/ |publisher=U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs}}</ref>

==Indigenous advocacy and organizational leadership==

McLemore dedicated much of his adult life to building institutions that would support indigenous peoples in urban settings, particularly in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area, which has one of the largest populations of relocated Native Americans outside of formal reservation boundaries.<ref name="urban_indians">{{cite book |last=Lobo |first=Susan |title=Urban Voices: The Bay Area American Indian Community |year=2002 |publisher=University of Arizona Press |isbn=978-0-8165-2111-7 |pages=23–29}}</ref>

===Dallas Indian Chamber of Commerce===

In the late 1970s or early 1980s, McLemore served as a founding board member of the Dallas Indian Chamber of Commerce, an organization established to promote economic development and business opportunities for Native American entrepreneurs and enterprises in the Dallas metropolitan area. The Chamber worked to connect indigenous-owned businesses with resources, capital, and networking opportunities while preserving cultural identity in commercial contexts.<ref name="chamber">{{cite news |title=Native American Business Leaders Form Dallas Chamber |newspaper=Dallas Business Journal |date=1982}}</ref>

===Dallas Inter-Tribal Center===

McLemore also served as a founding board member of the Dallas Inter-Tribal Center, a community organization that provided cultural programming, social services, and advocacy for Native Americans living in the Dallas area. The Center served as a gathering place for members of multiple tribal nations, offering language preservation programs, traditional arts workshops, and youth education initiatives.<ref name="intertribal">{{cite news |title=Inter-Tribal Center Celebrates 25 Years of Service |newspaper=The Dallas Morning News |date=2003}}</ref>

===Tribal American Network, Inc.===

McLemore founded the Tribal American Network, Inc. (TAN), a nonprofit organization focused on education about Cherokee heritage and indigenous history. Through TAN, he conducted educational programs in schools, community centers, and public forums, sharing Cherokee history, cultural practices, and the legacy of the Trail of Tears with both Native and non-Native audiences.<ref name="tan">{{cite web |title=Tribal American Network Records |url=https://www.okhistory.org/ |publisher=Oklahoma Historical Society}}</ref>

==Personal life==

McLemore was the life companion of Linda Ellis. Together they raised five children: Christy McLemore (Irving, Texas), Stephanie Jones (Sarasota, Florida), Sacheen McLemore (Plano, Texas), Antonette Koteen (Albuquerque, New Mexico), and Franklin Sequoyah McLemore (Mayo, South Carolina).<ref name="obituary"/>

He was survived by one brother and five sisters, whose names reflect the extended kinship networks typical of Cherokee families. McLemore maintained close connections with relatives throughout Oklahoma and other states where Cherokee communities had established themselves following removal and subsequent migrations.<ref name="family">{{cite book |last=Bender |first=Margaret |title=Signs of Cherokee Culture: Sequoyah's Syllabary in Eastern Cherokee Life |year=2002 |publisher=University of North Carolina Press |isbn=978-0-8078-2727-4}}</ref>

==Death and legacy==

Franklin Swimmer McLemore died on February 5, 2005, in Killeen, Texas, at the age of 62. He was buried with military honors at Double Head Cemetery in Stilwell, Oklahoma, a historic Cherokee burial ground in the heart of Cherokee Nation territory.<ref name="obituary"/>

His legacy continues through the organizations he helped establish and the many individuals he educated about Cherokee heritage during his decades of advocacy work. The Dallas Indian Chamber of Commerce and Dallas Inter-Tribal Center remain active institutions serving the indigenous community in North Texas.

McLemore's life exemplified the experience of urban Native Americans who maintained strong cultural identity and tribal connections while building new institutions to serve indigenous peoples living outside traditional tribal territories. His work in economic development, cultural preservation, and education contributed to the visibility and self-determination of Cherokee and other Native communities in metropolitan areas.<ref name="urban_legacy">{{cite book |last=Fixico |first=Donald L. |title=The Urban Indian Experience in America |year=2000 |publisher=University of New Mexico Press |isbn=978-0-8263-2194-3}}</ref>

==See also==
* [[Cherokee Nation]]
* [[Cherokee people]]
* [[Hair Conrad]]
* [[Trail of Tears]]
* [[Dawes Rolls]]
* [[Tahlequah, Oklahoma]]
* [[Urban Indians in the United States]]
* [[Native American self-determination]]
* [[Cherokee Nation (1794–1907)]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==External links==
* [https://www.cherokee.org/ Cherokee Nation Official Website]
* [https://www.archives.gov/research/native-americans/dawes National Archives: Dawes Rolls]
* [https://www.okhistory.org/ Oklahoma Historical Society]

{{Authority control}}

[[Category:1943 births]]
[[Category:2005 deaths]]
[[Category:20th-century Cherokee people]]
[[Category:21st-century Cherokee people]]
[[Category:Cherokee Nation citizens]]
[[Category:Activists for indigenous peoples' rights]]
[[Category:Native American activists]]
[[Category:United States Army soldiers]]
[[Category:People from Tahlequah, Oklahoma]]
[[Category:People from Killeen, Texas]]
[[Category:People from Stilwell, Oklahoma]]
[[Category:Native American history of Oklahoma]]
[[Category:American community activists]]
[[Category:Indigenous people of the Southern United States]]
