{{Infobox clergy
| name               = Frederick Janvrin Vincent
| birth_date         = 1850
| birth_place        = [[Batley]], [[Yorkshire]], England
| death_date         = 1920
| death_place        = [[Salt Lake City]], [[Utah]], United States
| denomination       = [[Episcopal Church (United States)|Episcopal]]
| occupation         = Missionary, Clergyman
| spouse             = Laura Alice Tregeagle
| churches           = [[St. Peter's Episcopal Church (Salt Lake City)|St. Peter's Episcopal Church]], Salt Lake City
| education          = [[Theological training]] (England)
}}

'''Frederick Janvrin Vincent''' (1850–1920) was an English-born [[Episcopal Church (United States)|Episcopal]] priest and missionary who served as a central figure in the religious expansion of the American West during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He is recognized as the founder of '''[[St. Peter's Episcopal Church (Salt Lake City)|St. Peter's Episcopal Church]]''' in [[Salt Lake City]], [[Utah]], and conducted mission work across multiple states during a period of rapid westward expansion.

==Early life and education==
Vincent was born in 1850 in [[Batley]], [[Yorkshire]], England, the son of Frederick Augustus Vincent, a professor of music, and Amelia Janvrin.<ref>UK Census 1851, HO107/2323, Household of Frederick Augustus Vincent, Batley, Yorkshire.</ref> He was named after his great-granduncle, [[Frederick Janvrin]], a prominent Jersey merchant.

Vincent received theological training in England before deciding to emigrate to pursue missionary work in the expanding American territories. His decision to enter the ministry represented a departure from his family's musical and mercantile traditions.

==Emigration to America==
In 1881, Vincent emigrated from England to the United States, arriving in [[San Francisco]] aboard the ''SS City of Sydney''.<ref>U.S. National Archives, Passenger Lists, SS City of Sydney, San Francisco arrival, 1881.</ref> He was accompanied by his wife, Laura Alice Tregeagle (née, daughter of James Tregeagle, a stonemason from [[Cornwall]]), and other family members.

Upon arrival, Vincent was commissioned as a '''Missionary-at-Large''' under the domestic mission program of the [[Episcopal Church (United States)|Episcopal Church]], which sought to establish Anglican liturgical presence in frontier regions with limited religious infrastructure.

==Missionary career==

===Ministry pattern===
Vincent's career followed what contemporary church records described as a "Two-Year Foundation" model,<ref>Journal of the Missionary District of Utah, Episcopal Church Archives, Austin, Texas, 1896.</ref> in which he would:

# Arrive in an underserved community
# Establish a mission congregation
# Secure property or meeting space
# Build initial membership and financial support
# Train local leadership
# Move to a new location once the mission was self-sustaining

This itinerant ministry pattern was common among Episcopal frontier missionaries during the late 19th century, particularly in regions where population density was insufficient to support permanent clergy.

===Geographic scope===
Vincent served in missions across multiple states and territories:

* '''Washington Territory''' (1880s): Established missions in mining and logging communities
* '''Texas''' (1880s-1890s): Founded mission churches in [[Lake Charles, Louisiana|Lake Charles]] and surrounding Gulf Coast communities<ref>The Living Church Annual, Clerical Directory, 1881-1920.</ref>
* '''New York''' (brief appointment)
* '''Utah''' (1896-1920): Founded and served St. Peter's Episcopal Church, Salt Lake City

His ministry focused on communities experiencing rapid demographic change due to mining, railroad expansion, and westward migration.

==St. Peter's Episcopal Church==

===Founding===
In 1896, Vincent founded '''St. Peter's Episcopal Church''' in [[Salt Lake City]], Utah, during a period of significant religious and demographic transition in the region.<ref>Journal of the Missionary District of Utah, Episcopal Church Archives, 1896.</ref> The church was established to serve non-Mormon residents and converts seeking an alternative to the dominant [[The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints|Latter-day Saint]] religious culture.

Salt Lake City's Episcopal mission represented a strategic effort by the [[Episcopal Church (United States)|Episcopal Church]] to provide Anglican liturgical presence in a region where traditional Protestant denominations were underrepresented. Vincent's work built upon earlier missionary efforts in Utah Territory that dated to the 1860s.

===Ministry approach===
Vincent's approach emphasized:
* Liturgical stability and traditional Anglican worship
* Outreach to mining and railroad communities
* Ecumenical cooperation with other Protestant denominations
* Establishment of permanent church buildings and governance structures

The church he founded served as a gathering point for Episcopal adherents across the Salt Lake Valley, many of whom were immigrants from Britain or the eastern United States.

===Later years===
Vincent served St. Peter's continuously from its founding in 1896 until his death in 1920, representing one of his longest tenures at a single parish. Under his leadership, the church grew from a small mission congregation to an established parish with a dedicated building and endowment.

==Personal life==
Vincent married Laura Alice Tregeagle, daughter of James Tregeagle (a Cornish stonemason) and Jane Roberts. The couple had children, including Paul Janvrin Vincent, who later resided in San Francisco.<ref>U.S. Census 1900, San Francisco, California, Household of Frederick J. Vincent, 1222 Oak Street.</ref>

His brother, [[Charles John Vincent]], became a prominent composer and organist in England, earning a [[Doctor of Music]] from [[University of Oxford|Oxford]]. Another brother, Augustus Janvrin Vincent, remained in the United States and settled on [[Martha's Vineyard]], Massachusetts.

==Death and legacy==
Frederick Janvrin Vincent died in 1920 in Salt Lake City. He is buried at [[Mount Olivet Cemetery (Salt Lake City)|Mount Olivet Cemetery]].<ref>Salt Lake City Cemetery Records, Mount Olivet Cemetery.</ref>

St. Peter's Episcopal Church continues to operate in Salt Lake City, representing one of the enduring institutions established during the Episcopal Church's late 19th-century western expansion. Vincent's career exemplifies the role of itinerant missionaries in establishing Protestant religious infrastructure across the American West during a period of rapid settlement and demographic change.

==See also==
* [[History of the Episcopal Church (United States)]]
* [[St. Peter's Episcopal Church (Salt Lake City)]]
* [[Religion in Utah]]
* [[American frontier]]
* [[Missionary]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==External links==
* [https://www.episcopalarchives.org/ Episcopal Church Archives] – Austin, Texas
* [https://www.stpeterslc.org/ St. Peter's Episcopal Church, Salt Lake City]

{{Authority control}}

[[Category:1850 births]]
[[Category:1920 deaths]]
[[Category:People from Batley]]
[[Category:English emigrants to the United States]]
[[Category:American Episcopal priests]]
[[Category:19th-century American clergy]]
[[Category:20th-century American clergy]]
[[Category:Christianity in Utah]]
[[Category:History of Salt Lake City]]
[[Category:People from Salt Lake City]]
[[Category:American Christian missionaries]]
[[Category:Christian missionaries in the United States]]
