==Family lineage and craft tradition==

James Eli Tregeagle came from a centuries-old tradition of Cornish stonemasons whose documented presence in [[Cornwall]] extends to the early 17th century. The Tregeagle family's masonry expertise was passed through successive generations via the formal [[apprenticeship]] system, establishing them among the skilled artisan families of the [[River Tamar|Tamar Valley]] region.

===Cornish origins===
The family's earliest documented ancestor, Nicholas Tregeagle (c. 1610–1680), appears in the [[Protestation Returns of 1641–1642|1641 Protestation Returns]] for [[East Cornwall]], a nationwide survey of adult males who pledged loyalty to [[Parliament of England|Parliament]] and the [[Church of England|Protestant faith]].<ref>Cornwall Record Office (Kresen Kernow), Protestation Returns for East Cornwall, 1641. Reference: PR/CAL/1/1.</ref> Subsequent generations settled in the parishes of [[Calstock]] and [[St Mellion]], where they established themselves in the stone-working trades.

===Guild tradition and apprenticeship===
The family's rise to master craftsman status is documented through apprenticeship indentures held at the Cornwall Record Office. By the mid-18th century, the Tregeagle name appears in local records with the designation "Master of the Craft," indicating the legal authority to train apprentices under the traditional [[guild]] system.<ref>Cornwall Record Office (Kresen Kernow), Apprenticeship Indentures, St Mellion Parish, 1776. Reference: X/432/17.</ref>

James Tregeagle (1762–1830), great-grandfather of James Eli, is recorded in parish indentures as both apprentice and later master, documenting the formal transmission of masonry skills across generations. His son, also named James (1802–1875), worked as a stonemason throughout East Cornwall during the period of intensive [[granite]] quarrying that supplied building stone for major Victorian-era construction projects, including [[London]]'s bridges and public buildings.<ref>Parish Registers of St Mellion and Calstock, 1800-1875. Held at Cornwall Record Office.</ref>

===The Calstock granite works===
John Tregeagle (1828–1898), father of James Eli, served as a master mason in [[Calstock]], a center of the Cornish granite industry. The Calstock quarries, positioned along the [[River Tamar]], provided direct water transport for cut stone to [[Plymouth]] and beyond, making it a strategic location for the stone trade.<ref>Barton, R.M. (1968). ''A History of the Cornish Copper and Tin Mining Industry''. Truro: D. Bradford Barton Ltd. pp. 145-152.</ref> John Tregeagle's workshop trained his sons in the traditional methods of working with granite and limestone, including the cutting of complex architectural elements such as [[Capital (architecture)|capitals]], [[molding (decorative)|moldings]], and [[ashlar]] facing.

===Technical expertise transmitted===
The specific skills James Eli Tregeagle brought to the [[Karl G. Maeser Memorial Building]] project—precision cutting of [[Ionic order|Ionic columns]], hand-carving of decorative elements, and finishing of [[Oolite|oolitic limestone]]—directly reflect the Cornish craft traditions passed through at least four documented generations of master masons. His ability to execute [[Neoclassical architecture|Neoclassical]] architectural details on a monumental scale represented the culmination of two centuries of accumulated expertise in the Tregeagle family workshop tradition.

===Connection to Cornish folklore===
The Tregeagle family shares ancestral connections to the legendary [[Jan Tregeagle]], a 17th-century [[magistrate]] whose story became one of Cornwall's most famous [[folklore|folktales]]. While Jan Tregeagle (died 1655) belonged to the landowning branch of the family at [[Trevorder]], genealogical research suggests the artisan Tregeagles of the Tamar Valley branched from this line in the late 16th century.<ref>Bottrell, William (1870). ''Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall''. Penzance: W. Cornish. pp. 89-102.</ref> This connection places the family within the core of [[Cornish people|Cornish]] cultural identity, bridging the social divide between landed gentry and skilled craftsmen.

===Immigration and craft diaspora===
James Eli Tregeagle's 1881 emigration to the [[United States]] was part of the broader [[Cornish emigration|Cornish diaspora]], during which thousands of skilled miners and masons left Cornwall due to the decline of the tin and copper industries. Unlike many Cornish emigrants who entered the mining sector in the American West, Tregeagle's family craft tradition enabled him to pursue architectural masonry, applying centuries-old techniques to the construction of institutional buildings in [[Utah]].<ref>Payton, Philip (1999). ''The Cornish Overseas: A History of Cornwall's 'Great Emigration'''. Fowey: Alexander Associates. pp. 234-267.</ref>

==See also==
* [[Cornish people]]
* [[Cornish Americans]]
* [[Stonemasonry]]
* [[Apprenticeship]]
* [[River Tamar]]
* [[Calstock]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}
